# Boot Loader

The Boot Loader is responsible for transitioning from the BIOS to the OS Kernel. The Master Boot Record of the primary hard drive contains code that points to the boot loader (config files and other components are stored on the hard drive elsewhere). The most popular boot loader is currently GRUB, which stands for “GRand Unified Bootloader”. The latest version is GRUB 2, which has caused GRUB 1 (or GRUB Legacy, as its now called) to be phased out in newer releases. While GRUB is the default boot loader for Linux, it can also be used to boot Windows and other supported OS’s as well.

Part 1: GRUB Menu Tools

**Command Prompt**

Both GRUB Legacy and GRUB2 offer the ability to drop to a BASH-like shell from the boot menu. Pressing ‘c’ will take you to a command prompt where you can perform a subset of BASH commands. Pressing the ESC key will exit from the command prompt.

**Edit Menu Entry**

Both GRUB Legacy and GRUB2 allow you to edit menu items on the fly as well, providing the option to change boot parameters. Note that these changes are not permanent and last only for a single boot. Permanent changes to boot parameters should be made in the configuration files below. This tool is useful when needing to boot to different runlevels or to fix problems with the system when it won’t boot normally.

Part 2: GRUB Legacy Configuration

GRUB Legacy, which was included with Red Hat/Cent OS 6, has a straightforward configuration. The configuration file is in /boot/grub/grub.conf and this file contains both menu options and boot commands. The following are some useful configurations to change:

·     hiddenmenu - using this option will cause the menu to be hidden, instead you will receive a prompt at bootup that says ‘press any key to enter the menu’. Comment this option out (using # in front of it) to disable it.

·     timeout=<n> - Sets the timeout in seconds before selecting the default boot option

·     default=<n> - Sets the default boot option, referencing it by line number. The numbering begins with 0, so line 1 would be option 0, line 2 would be option 1, etc.

·     The file also contains entries in the boot menu, which can be modified, reordered, etc.

Part 3: GRUB2 Configuration

GRUB 2 reads configuration info from /boot/grub2/grub.cfg, however, **this file should not be edited** but should be generated. The process is a little different depending on the platform, but on all of them the menu configuration settings are found in while the template scripts are found in /etc/

| /boot/grub2/grub.cfg (BIOS) OR  /boot/efi/EFI/redhat/grub.cfg (UEFI) | Generated config file, should  not be edited      |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- |
| /etc/default/grub                                            | Menu configuration settings                       |
| /etc/grub.d/                                                 | Folder containing template  configuration scripts |

**Menu Configuration**

Some useful features to edit in the /etc/default/grub files are:

·     GRUB_DEFAULT={<name>|<entry_number>|saved} - Tells GRUB to autoboot either a particular boot entry in the list by number or the name of an entry in the boot list. Numbering begins with 0, so the second entry in the list would be number 1. Using the ‘saved’ keyword will cause GRUB to autoboot the last entry that was selected.

o  When using the ‘saved’ keyword, you must also set the line GRUB_SAVEDEFAULT=true or it won’t work.

·     GRUB_TIMEOUT_STYLE=[hidden|menu] – This option defines the behavior of the Grub menu on boot. 

o  hidden: this setting will cause GRUB to hide the boot selection menu, displaying a blank or splash screen. While this blank or splash screen is displayed, it will wait the time specified by the GRUB_HIDDEN_TIMEOUT to allow the user to press ESC to display the menu, otherwise it will boot the menu item specified by GRUB_DEFAULT.

o  menu: this setting will cause the menu to be displayed for the time specified by GRUB_TIMEOUT before booting the menu item specified by GRUB_DEFAULT.

·     GRUB_HIDDEN_TIMEOUT=<n> - This option works with GRUB_TIMEOUT_STYLE=hidden and specifies the number of seconds specified by ‘n’ that GRUB will wait for a user to press ESC to display the menu before booting into the option specified by GRUB_DEFAULT. Setting this to 0 will cause GRUB to autoboot immediately, which is useful when not dual booting

·     GRUB_TIMEOUT=<n> - This option works with GRUB_TIMEOUT_STYLE=menu and causes GRUB to wait for the number of seconds specified by ‘n’ before GRUB chooses the default command, setting this to ‘1’ will disable the auto-timeout and force GRUB to wait for a manual selection.

·     GRUB_BACKGROUND=”</path/to/background.png>” - Specifies an image to use as the background for the GRUB boot menu. It will accept JPG but only up to 256 colors, so it’s easier to use PNG.

**Template Configuration**

The /etc/grub.d/ folder contains scripts used to build the actual boot menu entries. Generally these will not be edited, but if, for instance, you want to add a Windows installation as a dual-boot option, a manually entry can be made. You would need to determine first what partition the Windows installation resides on, which can be done using the command fdisk -l to list the partitions on the system. Once the partition has been identified, an entry would be created in the file /etd/grub.d/40_custom as shown below (assuming Windows was installed on sda2 (which corresponds to hd0, partition 1, the details of which are beyond the scope of this document):

menuentry "Windows 7" {

set root=(hd0,1)

chainloader +1

}

**Applying Changes**

After modifying the menu configuration or the templates, the grub.cfg file must be regenerated. This depends on the platform, but for our systems, use the following:

RedHat/Debian : grub2-mkconfig --output=/boot/grub2/grub.cfg 
 Ubuntu: update-grub

Section 2: init (System-V)

Older versions of Linux use the init daemon to handle all processes. CentOS 5 was the last version to use true init before switching to Upstart in CentOS 6. Init operates off the idea of runlevels and scripts to handle the boot process of loading all requested services. 

Part 1: Runlevels

Linux Distributions that use the SystemV (init) method of handling processes operate using runlevels. Runlevels define what tasks can be accomplished given the current state of the system (runlevel being the name for the state of the system). Traditional Linux systems have 3 basic reserved runlevels plus one or more runlevels assigned for normal operations.

Linux Basic Runlevels

| **Level** | **Purpose**                                                  |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 0         | Shut down the system (the halt command sets the system to this runlevel) |
| 1         | Single-user mode; usually aliased  as ‘s’ or ‘S’             |
| 6         | Reboot the system (the reboot command sets the system to this runlevel) |

 

These runlevels are largely dependent on the distribution and are not standardized, but the table below gives some examples.

Common Linux Runlevels for Normal Operations

| **Level** | **Purpose**                                                  |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 2         | Multiuser mode without  networking                           |
| 3         | *Multiuser mode  with networking*                            |
| 5         | Multiuser mode with networking  and the X Windows System GUI |

A default or target runlevel is preconfigured on a Linux system by setting the id: variable in /etc/inittab to one of these runlevels. When the system boots, it will set the runlevel to the target runlevel and run any processes set to run at the runlevel. An example of /etc/inittab from CentOS 6 is shown below, which uses runlevel 5 as its target.:

\# Default runlevel. The runlevels used are:

\#  0 - halt (Do NOT set initdefault to this)

\#  1 - Single user mode

\#  2 - Multiuser, without NFS (The same as 3, if you do not have networking)

\#  3 - Full multiuser mode

\#  4 - unused

\#  5 - X11 GUI

\#  6 - reboot (Do NOT set initdefault to this)

\# 

id:5:initdefault:

Part 2: Runlevel Commands

| who -r            | Show the current runlevel                                    |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| runlevel          | Shows the previous and current  runlevels, separated by a space. If no  previous runlevel is on record, it will how the letter ‘N’ instead. |
| startx            | Starts the X interface (also  known as X11), which is the graphical interface for Linux. This is actually a frontend for another  command called xinit |
| chkconfig  --list | Shows what services are set to start  at the each runlevel. Each service is  shown as ‘on’ or ‘off’ for each runlevel.   For instance 0:off   1:on means this particular  service will not start at runlevel 0 but will start at runlevel 1. |
| telinit  <N>      | Change your current runlevel to  a different runlevel        |

 

**Temporarily Changing Target Runlevel at Boot**

To make a temporary change to the runlevel at boot, you can edit the boot command from the GRUB Legacy and GRUB 2 bootloaders. To do this, reboot or turn on the system, wait until you get to the bootloader and you will either see a list of options or it will tell you to press a key to get to the list of options. Once you are at the list of boot options (example below), highlight the boot option you want to use to change the runlevel of, typically the top boot option. Note: The first few screenshots show GRUB Legacy, but the steps are the same for GRUB2 up to a certain point.

​                               

After the option is highlighted, press ‘e’ to edit the boot command. You will be presented with another menu of options, in our example we have root, kernel and initrd. Highlight the kernel line and press ‘e’ to edit this boot command.

 

Now you will be able to edit the actual command. To change the runlevel temporarily, move the cursor to the end of the line and add a single digit number corresponding to the runlevel you wish to boot to. Note that GRUB Legacy will only have a small amount of information while GRUB2 has quite a few lines to dig through. You just need to find the line that shows the kernel load command. Both are shown in the example below, with runlevel 3 specified, meaning it will boot to full multiuser mode, but CLI only.

  
 **GRUB LEGACY**

In GRUB Legacy, press ‘Enter’ to save the change and return to the options menu. With the same option highlighted, press ‘b’ to boot.

 

 

**GRUB2**

In GRUB2, after editing the boot command, just press CTRL+X to boot with the modified parameter.
 

**Permanently Changing Target Runlevel**

To permanently change the Runlevel target so that it boots to the same runlevel every time, modify the file /etc/inittab and find the line that starts with id: and change the number right after the colon to the runlevel you want to boot to. Be sure to only use a single digit number for the runlevel. After modifying and saving the file, just reboot.

id:5:initdefault:

Part 3: Init scripts

The init process works by checking special directories and processing scripts in those directories in alpha-numeric order, beginning with the first and ending with the list. The scripts are located within folders inside of /etc/rc.d/, with each folder corresponding to a runlevel number. For instance, the folder rc1.d contains scripts that are executed when the system enters runlevel 1. We will take the folder rc.3 from CentOS 6 as an example:

 

The aqua color indicates that these are not the actual files but symbolic links (or symlinks) to actual files located elsewhere. However, referencing the symlinks is the same as referencing the original file. To see what files these reference, use ls -la to show the links to the original files (in this case, they are in /etc/rc.d/init.d/. The double period indicates that the path starts in the parent folder, which is /etc/rc.d, then appends the rest of the path shown, /init.d/xxx)

 

Notice the scripts have a few different distinct properties in that some scripts begin with a ‘K’ and others begin with an ‘S’. The K-scripts indicate that it stops or **kills** a process when that script is executed while the S-scripts indicate the process should be **started** when the script is executed. 

When the system enters runlevel 3, it will start with the first alph-numeric symlink and execute that script. Once the execution is complete, it will move onto the next one. Therefore, in the case shown above, K01smartd will be executed first and S99local will be executed last.

Part 4: Daemon Control

Daemons are controlled using the service command. Below are common commands used to control daemons in SysV.

| service  <service_name> status               | Shows the status of a daemon  process.                       |
| -------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| service  <service_name> stop                 | Stops a daemon process.                                      |
| service  <service_name> start                | Starts a daemon process.                                     |
| chkconfig  --list <service_name>             | Shows what runlevels a specific  service will start on. If no service  name is specified, shows a list of all daemons controlled by SysV. |
| chkconfig  <service_name> on                 | Enables a daemon to start at  runlevels 2,3,4 & 5            |
| chkconfig  <service_name> off                | Disables a daemon from running  at all runlevels             |
| chkconfig  --level <n..n> <service_name> on  | Enables a daemon to start at the  specified runlevels. List the levels  together with no spaces (ex. ‘35’ for runlevels 3 & 5) |
| chkconfig  --level <n..n> <service_name> off | Disables a daemon at the  specified runlevels. List the levels  together with no spaces (ex. ‘35’ for runlevels 3 & 5) |

Part 5: Logging

Logs are stored in /var/log/ on SysV controlled systems. The logs are split into different groups, depending on their function. The most common ones are listed below:

·     /var/log/message: General message and system related stuff

·     /var/log/kern.log: Kernel logs

·     /var/log/boot.log : System boot log

·     /var/log/secure: Authentication log

·     /var/log/utmp or /var/log/wtmp : Login records file

·     /var/log/yum.log: Yum log files

·     /var/log/faillog – Contains user failed login attemps.

These log files are stored in plaintext, but are protected and require root access to view.

Section 3: Upstart

Upstart was kind of an intermediary system that was used between init and systemd. It can be found beginning with Ubuntu 6.10 but up to Ubuntu 15.04, where it was replaced by system. RedHat also used Upstart in version 6 but replaced it with systemd starting in version 7. 

Upstart replaces the SystemV init command as process ID 1, running from /sbin/init on Ubuntu systems prior to 15.04. After 15.04, it runs as /sbin/upstart. It can be run on Linux systems after systemd was implemented. 

Upstart provides the ability to configure scripts that handle events and take actions on processes based on those events. The scripts are beyond the scope of this lab, but below are some basic commands that can be used with the Upstart system:

| initctl  status <service_name>  service  <service_name> status  status  <service_name> | Any of these three commands  accomplish the same task of showing the status of a service. |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| initctl stop  <service_name>  service  <service_name> stop  stop  <service_name> | Any of these three commands  accomplish the same task of stopping a service. |
| initctl  start <service_name>  service  <service_name> start  start  <service_name> | Any of these three commands  accomplish the same task of starting a service. |
| initctl list                                                 | List all jobs and their states                               |

Section 4: systemd

Systemd has replaced both SystemV init and Upstart. Systemd is more than just a replacement, however, as it takes over their job of managing processes along with many others. The diagram below gives a high-level overview of all that systemd covers:

 

Most of these functions are beyond the scope of this lab, but we will focus on systemd’s daemon management function, systemctl. 

Depending on the Linux distro, systemd runs as PID 1 from either /lib/systemd/systemd or /sbin/init (directories may also vary slightly, depending on distro)

Part 1: Units

Units refer to any resource that the system knows how to operate on or manage. The resources are defined using configuration files which are called unit files. Units are reference as the unit_name.unit_type. For instance, the network daemon’s unit name is network.service because it is a service unit.

Below are some types of units that exist in systemd:

·     .service - these are the units we’re primarily concerned with in this lab. These correspond to daemons.

·     .device - These are devices such as USB drives, hard drives, printers, etc

·     .mount - This is a mount point, or a location where a storage device is mapped to so that files can be accessed on it.

·     .snapshot - These store the current state of the system for recovery use

·     .target - This is basically the equivalent of a runlevel in systemd

Daemons are referenced by appending the unit name to the end of the daemon name. For instance, the network service is called network.service in systemd.

The following commands allow you to see information on the units of a system running systemd.

| systemctl  list-units                       | Shows all active units on the  system                        |
| ------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| systemctl  list-units --all                 | Shows all units that systemd has  loaded.                    |
| systemctl  list-units --all --state=<state> | Shows all units in a particular  state (states shown below)  |
| systemctl  list-unit-files                  | Shows every available unit file  on the system               |
| systemctl  cat <unit>                       | Shows the contents of the file  pertaining to a unit. When used on  service units, shows the parameters of the service. |
| systemctl  list-dependencies <unit>         | Shows the dependencies of a  unit. When used with service units, shows  the dependent daemons of that service. |

Units can be in one of multiple states:

·     active - unit is running, bound, plugged in, etc

·     inactive - unit is stopped, unbound, unplugged, etc

·     activating - transition state from inactive to active

·     deactivating - transition state from active to inactive

·     failed - an inactive state caused by an error

Part 2: Targets (aka Runlevels)

Systemd still has a concept of runlevels, but they are now under the umbrella of target units (note that not all targets are runlevels). Instead of the runlevel numbering system, the target units are named and then appended with the .target specification. Below are commands used to work with the targets:

| systemctl  list-units --type=target  | Shows all targets on a system                                |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| systemctl get-default                | Shows the default target for the  system                     |
| systemctl  set-default <unit.target> | Sets the default target for the  system                      |
| systemctl  isolate <unit.target>     | Changes the current target of  the system which results in an immediate change to that level (equivalent of  changing the current runlevel in SysV) |

Below is a list of the common targets for systemd:

·     poweroff.target - Equivalent of runlevel 0, which halts the system

·     rescue.target - Equivalent of runlevel 1, which boots to single-user mode

·     multi-user.target - Equivalent of runlevel 3, which boots to the CLI in SysV

·     graphical.target - Equivalent of runlevel 5, which boots to the GUI in SysV

·     reboot.target - Equivalent of runlevel 6, which reboots the system

It should be noted that there are also symlinks named ‘runlevelX.target’ that point to the new named targets, as shown below:

 

Part 3: Daemon Control

The following commands are used in systemd to control daemons running in systemd:

| systemctl  start <daemon.service>      | Start a daemon                                               |
| -------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| systemctl  stop <daemon.service>       | Stops a daemon                                               |
| systemctl  status <daemon.service>     | Gives information on the status  of a daemon                 |
| systemctl  restart <daemon.service>    | Restarts a daemon                                            |
| systemctl  enable <daemon.service>     | Sets a daemon to start on boot  up                           |
| systemctl  disable <daemon.service>    | Disables a daemon from starting  on boot up                  |
| systemctl  is-enabled <daemon.service> | Checks to see if a service is set  to start on boot up       |
| systemctl -a                           | Show all loaded units, which are  those that are being controlled by systemd |

Part 4: Systemd logs

Systemd stores logfiles in binary format, as opposed to the plaintext logfiles of SysV. This means that the log files cannot be viewed by a normal text viewer, they must be viewed by programs specifically designed to read their binary format. The commands below allow the reading of log files. Note that many of these command options can be combined as well.

| journalctl             | Shows all logs collected by  journald                        |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| journalctl  -n <N>     | Shows the last N number of logs                              |
| journalctl  -f         | Shows the last few lines of the  log file refreshes as more lines are added to the logfile. Press CTRL+C to exit |
| journalctl  -u <unit>  | Views a log file for a  particular unit (such as a service)  |
| journalctl  -b         | Shows all logs since the last  reboot                        |
| journalctl  _PID=<pid> | Shows logs related to a specific  process ID (press q to exit) |
| journalctl  _UID=<uid> | Shows logs related to a  particular user ID. HINT: You can find  a user’s UID with the command ‘id -u <username>’ |

 